Digital Edition of the Documents of the Congresses of Aix-la-Chapelle,
Troppau/Opava, Laibach/Ljubljana and Verona 1818--1822

*Karin Schneider, Stephan Kurz (Institute for Modern and Contemporary
Historical Research at the Austrian Academy of Sciences)*

Introduction
============

The congresses of Aix-la-Chapelle (1818), Troppau/Opava (1820),
Laibach/Ljubljana (1821) and Verona (1822) were crucial for the
formation and the functioning of the European State System in the
nineteenth century. Nevertheless, these gatherings are largely
marginalized in historiographical perception. Although the
representatives of the European powers -- namely Austria, France, Great
Britain, Prussia and Russia -- deliberated security issues as well as
slave trade, the fate of the Ottoman Empire and the constitution of the
German Confederation, historic accounts on this period tend to simplify
and to underestimate the results of these negotiations.[^1]

Different factors impeded research on and analysis of these congresses.
In German historiography they are perceived as manifestations of
reactionary political tendencies after the Congress of Vienna, which are
summed up in the pejorative label "Holy Alliance". Sometimes they are
discerned as sequels of the Congress of Vienna, which brought no
political innovation for the European community of states. And last but
not least almost no written historical sources of these congresses were
available in printed form. Over the years, some of the protocols and
memoirs have been published, but are not easy to access because of the
variety of places of publication. Therefore, scholars interested in this
topic had to do extensive archival research and could not rely on
printed editions.

This short paper presents the authors' joint efforts to create a
state-of-the-art digital edition of these important historical papers.
The first part outlines the historical context and the thematic contents
of the documents. In the second part we show how we went to work
(technicalities of the transcriptions in TEI-flavoured XML, the
development of multiple access paths as discovery tools, the technical
platform we are using). The paper thus has two objectives: To further
the use of our 'Mächtekongresse' application, thus initiating both an
extended understanding of the historical source material, and -- not
less importantly -- fostering new discourse on methodologies that make
use of the digital paradigm.

The Congresses
==============

The paper trails of the Congresses of Aix-la-Chapelle, Troppau/Opava,
Laibach/Ljubljana and Verona are kept in the Austrian state archives
(Haus-, Hof- und Staatsarchiv department), and have been transcribed in
a series of FWF funded projects by Karin Schneider. This ensures easier
access to the results of the congresses, sparing the original papers the
hardship of being used -- and offering a number of new pathways to
access resources on early nineteenth century European history in the
context of what has been dubbed the 'Concert of Europe'.

The Concert of Europe developed during the Napoleonic wars. In 1813, the
powers contracted in the treaty of Chaumont not to make single peace
treaties with France but to fight Napoleon until his final defeat.
Austria, Great Britain, Prussia and Russia renewed their alliance after
Napoleon returned from Elba in March 1815, and transformed it in
November of the same year into the so-called Quadruple alliance -- the
nucleus of the European Concert of Powers. Article 6 of this treaty
stipulates the periodical convocation of congresses to deal with issues
of common European interest. In 1818, France was accepted as partner in
the alliance during the Congress of Aix-la-Chapelle and completed the
quintet of the five European great powers.

But the agenda of the Congress of Aix-la-Chapelle not only included the
reintegration of France into the European state system. It also provided
a forum for problems already relevant at the Congress of Vienna which
had not been solved in 1815. In other cases, the powers assumed the role
of an arbitrator or an appeal body that mediated controversial issues.

On the one hand, the diplomats and statesmen present in Aix-la-Chapelle
dealt with issues connected to the political upheavals which took place
during the Napoleonic wars. These include negotiations about border and
custom disputes within the German Confederation, the fate of the
Bonaparte family, the question of the ceremonial rank in the diplomatic
corps (which had already been discussed in Vienna in 1814/15), and the
legal status of the Jews in the German Confederation. Moreover, the
plenipotentiaries addressed the conflict between Denmark and Sweden
regarding Swedish indemnity payments as part of the obligations
contracted in the Treaty of Kiel in January 1814, as well as the
complaints of the inhabitants of Monaco against the governmental system
initiated by their new prince.

On the other hand, some topics negotiated in Aix-la-Chapelle had a
global or humanitarian character. Following up on their negotiations at
the Vienna Congress, the plenipotentiaries discussed the abolition of
the Atlantic slave trade, the fight against the Barbary pirates and the
liberation of their Christian prisoners. A new issue related to the
global order was South America. The revolutions there as well as the
conflict over Montevideo were important points on the agenda of the
statesmen and diplomats assembled in Aix-la-Chapelle. Moreover, the
plenipotentiaries dealt with the fate of the Swedish ex-queen and her
family.

The congresses of Troppau/Opava and Laibach/Ljubljana (1820/21) differed
from the negotiations in Aix-la-Chapelle, as there was only one issue on
the agenda: the fear of new revolutions in Europa. In 1820, revolution
broke out in Spain, Portugal and the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies. The
new governments proclaimed the liberal constitution of Cádiz of 1812,
which limited the rights of the monarchical sovereign and -- in the view
of conservative statesmen and traditional monarchs -- posed a threat to
peace and tranquillity in Europe. The discussions and negotiations in
these years not only show the fear of revolution, but reflect the
complex relations between the European powers in this era and the
connection between Foreign policy and internal political considerations
as well. The governments of France and Great Britain both struggled with
domestic problems and a strong opposition. Both states did not send
official plenipotentiaries, but only observers to Troppau/Opava in order
not to stir up liberal headwinds at home. Nevertheless, the diplomats
and statesmen followed the proposal of Austria's foreign minister
Metternich and decided 1821 to suppress the revolution in the Kingdom of
the Two Sicilies. Furthermore, the plenipotentiaries decided to summon a
new congress the following year to discuss the end of the military
occupation of Naples.

In 1822, the representatives of the European powers gathered in Verona.
However, in the meantime the results of the congresses of Troppau/Opava
and Laibach/Ljubljana had been overtaken by the course of events: After
the revolution of 1820 Spain was in fact in a state akin to civil war.
In the perspective of the French government, these conditions threatened
peace and security in France. Therefore, the most important topic on the
agenda was the envisaged French military intervention on the Iberian
Peninsula. But the plenipotentiaries deliberated not only the difficult
situation in Spain, but political questions regarding Italy, too. In
particular, they discussed the withdrawal of the occupation forces from
the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies and from the Kingdom of
Sardinia-Piedmont, after the 1821 revolutions. Similar to the
proceedings of Aix-la-Chapelle, the diplomats and statesmen assembled in
Verona dealt with several political, humanitarian and economic issues of
European interest, e.g. the constraint relations between the Ottoman
Empire and -- closely connected -- the Greek war of independence, the
Atlantic slave trade, the relation between the European Powers and the
former colonies in South America, custom-free river transport as well as
the fate and the abode of members of the Bonaparte and Murat family, and
legal claims deriving from the Napoleonic era.

The Congress of Verona was the last gathering on the basis of article 6
of the treaty of the quadruple alliance from 1815. Seven years after the
Congress of Vienna, this form of consultation practice came to an end.
The reasons for this development are complex and may be found in the
personalities of the actors, the shift of the political focus from
Western and Southern Europe towards Southeastern Europe. The Greek
insurrection and the reaction of the powers showed clearly their
divergent interests in this part of the world.[^2] Nevertheless, the
European powers continued their close cooperation and consultation.
During the nineteenth century, several multilateral conferences on
different diplomatic levels took place to deliberate and regulate
international conflicts. On more than 15 occasions, the representatives
of the powers discussed mediation strategies, practiced conflict
management and took concerted measures to increase diplomatic pressure
to forestall military confrontation and to secure peace.[^3] Even though
the Concert of Europe did not rest on firm, institutionalised structures
but mainly on the commitment of leading statesmen and monarchs, it
continued to exist and function up at least until the Crimean War in
1853. At the same time, in the second half of the nineteenth century
several conferences and consultation meetings took place to regulate
European affairs -- this only came to end when World War I brought a
decisive break.

The congresses can be read as diplomatic manifestations of a new
approach towards international relations in the first decades of the
nineteenth century. As Paul W. Schroeder has pointed out, the European
system of powers moved towards cooperation and consensus in the wake of
the Napoleonic Wars.[^4] The European Concert of Powers
institutionalized international conferences to discuss problems
concerning Europe and to mediate between conflicting parties to secure
peace and tranquillity on the continent. The four congresses after the
Congress of Vienna are -- besides several ambassadorial conferences --
means to achieve these ends.

Preliminary works and Cooperation partners
==========================================

The transcription of the documents related to the congresses started in
2009 as part of the FWF-funded project "Der Wiener Kongress und sein
europäisches Friedenssystem", headed by Reinhard Stauber (University of
Klagenfurt). Karin Schneider finished this work in the scope of her
project "Die Kongresse von Troppau und Laibach 1820/21", funded by the
FWF, too. Initially it was intended to publish the documents in a
printed edition in the series of the "Kommission für die neuere
Geschichte Österreichs". But with regard to the advantages of digital
editions this plan was abolished. Two arguments justify the edition --
the first aiming for general accessibility of sound transcripts of the
Congresses' respective paper trails (which could have been tackled by a
'traditional' paper-based edition as well), the second expanding that to
online accessibility without the need to physically move to either the
archives or a library holding a paper edition.

Workshops about digital editing at the ÖAW provided important inputs and
facilitated this decision, namely the ACDH Tool Gallery 3.1 "XML, TEI,
OXYGEN: Einführung und Praxis" (Daniel Schopper and Ulrike Czeitschner)
and the Summer School at the Institute for Modern and Contemporary
Historical Research (INZ) in October 2017.[^5]

Moreover, the ÖAW-ACDH, which serves as a service institution within the
Austrian Academy of Sciences, provided technical support and
infrastructure.

Transcriptions in XML
=====================

Following widespread good practice of digital scholarly editing, the
transcriptions were prepared using the XML schema proposed by the Text
Encoding Initiative (TEI P5).[^6] Given that in almost all cases there
are only singular archival records available as source materials, this
is an adequate solution that did not require too much of additional
manual markup effort.[^7]

From the perspective of editorial scholarship, the 'Mächtekongresse'
edition does follow the guidelines and good practices of standard
necessary to produce accurate textual representation of the documents.

In order to achieve this, a subset of the TEI namespace had to be
used.[^8]

In this short overview, we cannot go into detail on the elements used,
but we point out that the TEI files are readily available for download
both from the individual document's metadata header block and through
RestXQ.

The most frequent textual phenomena encountered in the edition files
include: contemporary additions and deletions, changes of scribes,
recordings of paper damage and additions and supplements by the editor.
To add to the functionality of the resulting web application and root
linked data deep into the edition's fabrics, references to named
entities such as persons, places and institutions have been added as
well. The edition currently distinguishes between directly mentioned
`[``pers|org|``place``]Name`s and references to the meant entity (e.g.
`persName` is used if a part of a person's proper name is mentioned,
whereas a reference to the same person without explicit naming is
encoded as `rs`` type="person"`).[^9]

Up to three scientific apparatus are displayed throughout the edition
documents: The editorial apparatus including commentary and notes on
context is being counted numerically (1, 2, 3, ...). As soon as notes
are present in the source documents, those are distinguished by
alphabetical indexes (a, b, c, ...). A third apparatus, indicated by
lowercase roman numbering, is shown in cases where longer phrases have
been transcribed as textual variants.

When we started to develop and adopt the viewer application, the
transcripts were already in an almost publishable form, but had to be
corrected (markup- and language-wise) and harmonised with respect to
some XML elements.

Interfaces as access paths to historical documents
==================================================

Beside the above named arguments for a digital edition there is an even
more powerful addition that the digital form entails: The edition's web
application enables users to access the edition data in new ways that
transcend the scientific value of the standardised markup that
constitutes the edition.

Tables of contents are contructed from the file listings. The underlying
files are labelled and sorted by the places of the congresses and a
consecutive numbering which depicts the chronological order of the
congresses' proceedings. This structure is used for the ordering of the
documents themselves ("Dokumente"), the descriptions of the archival
holdings ("Bestandsbeschreibungen") and the abstracts ("Regesten").

A spatial rendering of the origins of the edited documents is available
directly at the landing page of the web application in form of a map
that gives the broader context of post-napoleonic Europe.[^10]

Two additional chronological access paths make use of the `@when`
attributes in the `teiHeader` metadata concerning the dating of the
documents: A calendar view and a timeline view. While the calendar
allows to link the documents (and the events that led to them) to a
structured understanding of time (from year to months and days of the
week), the timeline view gives an overview of the temporal continuum
that the documents relate to more from a bird's eye.

The relatively deep tagging of named entities in the TEI files -- mostly
person and place data, only two institions have been listed separately
-- enables access to the edition data by means of indices automatically
created from the encoded files. The `listPlace` index of places includes
geo data that allows for a spatial pinning not only of the places of
document generation, but also of all places that are mentioned within
the edition text. Furthermore, all places mentioned include GeoNames
identifiers to ensure interoperability with other ressources in a linked
open data approach, and a representation on any given map (in the
current version, our web application takes the shortcut of using
contemporary GIS data via leaflet/OpenStreetMap).[^11] The same holds
true for the reference data identifying persons, where we chose to use
the norm data from the Virtual International Authority File (VIAF) to
disambiguate persons and link them to the documents in a
machine-readable way. The web application also provides access through
an API, through a simple Beacon file and through JSON-based autocomplete
data.

Abstracts are provided to describe the actual contents of the documents.
These are provided as a separate list through the table of contents
submenu, but also in the head section of the individual documents'
views.

Conceptionally opposed to a structured semantic approach the web
interface also offers a full text search (implemented in Apache Lucene),
its results (displayed in a `datatables` view) can be narrowed down on
the fly just by using a text input field.

Technicalities and Platform Choice
==================================

As the ÖAW-ACDH was taking part in the HRSM-funded project
*Kompetenznetzwerk Digitale Edition (KONDE)* already, and our academic
home institute, the Institute for Modern and Contemporary Historical
Research (INZ) got involved in this network effort as well, our
attention focused on choosing a technical solution for the web
application from this ecosystem. This predetermined our deciding to use
the `dsebaseapp` as a blueprint for developing an application for
accessing the TEI edition data. `dsebaseapp` (dse stands for 'digital
scholarly edition') was developed by Peter Andorfer at the ÖAW-ACDH as a
starting point for edition interfaces, and it is especially suitable for
epistolary material since it in itself stems from the application for
the letters of Leo von Thun-Hohenstein.[^12] With the assistance of a
series of accompanying blog posts,[^13] we proceeded to implement
`maechtekongresse` as an application for the `eXist-db` platform[^14]
which is notorious in the Digital Humanities context.

This choice has also been influenced by the fact that the amount of data
in the edition is relatively small, as it does not include image data
and spans a total of 115 XML documents only. Moreover, due to the fact
that there was no additional funding available, the solution to be
selected could not be other than "free" (as in software), and the
ÖAW-ACDH already had server and network infrastructure in place for
using an eXist-db approach. In addition, this infrastructure includes
the possibility to archive the edition data in ARCHE (A Resource Centre
for the HumanitiEs).[^15] Consequently, there were no viable
alternatives available to this whole package.

The access paths outlined above are mostly based on preparatory work
from the KONDE consortium, especially drawing from the aforementioned
`dsebaseapp` package developed by Peter Andorfer that reused XSLT
transformation scripts written by Dario Kampkaspar (both are currently
working at the ÖAW-ACDH). Since early 2018, the application was refined
in close collaboration between ÖAW-ACDH and INZ.

A beta version of the 'Mächtekongresse' edition is available online
since September 2018 on <https://maechtekongresse.acdh-dev.oeaw.ac.at/>,
with the next version due in the upcoming weeks, to be made available on
<https://maechtekongresse.acdh.oeaw.ac.at/>. The digital edition
licences all the edition data under Creative Commons (CC-BY 4.0)
licence, contributing to the digitally available research output of the
Austrian Academy of Sciences.

With the publication of the 'Mächtekongresse' edition, we hope to have
contributed to further historiographical investigation on a crucial
period in European history following the Napoleonic wars and the
Congress of Vienna, based on actual archival sources. On the technical
and methodological flip side of our effort, we intend to continue
furthering the development of suitable tools that open up historical
documents to new questions (and APIs).

Postscriptum: Known Desiderata
==============================

-   Sources in the bibliography (`listBibl` in `listtreaties.xml` and
    `listWit` in `listwit.xml`) are currently flat text, precluding
    programmatic access.

-   Whitespace handling, especially in mixed content XML nodes that
    contain both text and child elements, is still not properly
    addressed. As a result, some links include trailing spaces preceding
    punctuation marks. In general, the authoritative version of the
    'Mächtekongresse' edition is the one transcribed in the TEI XML
    files; those should be consulted in case the HTML representation
    raises doubts.

-   A network representation in GEFX format is being prepared; it is
    intended to depict the interrelations between sessions of congress
    (and the resulting documents that form the edition) and the
    individuals taking part therein. Such a network view will allow
    grasping the relation in a chronotopical context.

-   All of the edition's documentary data is yet to be archived on the
    ARCHE service. Furthermore, the application's code will soon be
    public under MIT licence on the KONDE GitHub.[^16]

The team are grateful for any feedback regarding the 'Mächtekongresse'
digital edition.

[^1]: Remarkable exceptions in recent years are: Mark Jarrett, The
    Congress of Vienna and Its Legacy. War and Great Power Diplomacy
    after Napoleon (London -- New York 2013); Heinz Duchhardt, Der
    Aachener Kongress 1818. Ein europäisches Gipfeltreffen im Vormärz
    (München 2018); Paul W. Schroeder, Metternich's Diplomacy at Its
    Zenith 1820--1823 (Austin 1962); Guillaume de Bertier de Sauvigny,
    Metternich et la France après le Congrès de Vienne, Bd. 2 (Paris
    1968).

[^2]: See Miroslav Šedivý, Metternich, the Great Powers and the Eastern
    Question (Pilsen 2013).

[^3]: See Matthias Schulz, Normen und Praxis. Das Europäische Konzert
    der Großmächte als Sicherheitsrat 1815--1860 (München 2009), 684.

[^4]: Paul W. Schroeder, The Transformation of European politics
    1763--1848 (Oxford 1994).

[^5]: The Summer school was organised between the FWF project "Die
    Medialität diplomatischer Kommunikation (17. Jahrhundert)" (P
    30091), the Institute for History at Salzburg University, the Centre
    for Information Modelling at University of Graz in cooperation with
    the Institut für Dokumentologie und Editorik (IDE).

[^6]: In fact, some documents had been transcribed using standard MS
    Word text processing, and then converted to TEI XML using the
    OxGarage tool <http://oxgarage.tei-c.org/>.

[^7]: For a different approach concerning a similar textual genre, but
    different textual source situation, cf. the representation of the
    records of the Constitutional Convention of 1787 that remodels
    textual events with a relational database, using the Quill Project
    (<https://www.quillproject.net/quill>). In this case, the
    negotiations underlying a collaboratively edited text like the US
    federal constitution are represented as different types of events
    that result in different states of textual snippets at a given point
    time.

[^8]: In particular, this refers to the following TEI modules: `header`,
    `linking`, `core`, `textstructure`, `namesdates`, `transcr`,
    `textcrit`, `figures` and `msdescription`.

[^9]: Note on `country`: Only `place`s are recorded in the `listPlace`
    index, historical country names are not geo-referenced, but still
    marked up using the `country` tag.

[^10]: The monochrome map is based on a CC-licenced map "Europe 1820" by
    Andreas Kunz, Wolf Röss and Joachim Robert Möschl
    (<https://www.ieg-maps.uni-mainz.de/mapsp/mappEu820Serie2.htm>); it
    has been edited by Stephan Kurz and forms the background graphics
    for the whole web application.

[^11]: This might be updated to a more accurate data set stemming from
    the HistoGIS project that involves the ÖAW-ACDH,
    <https://histogis.acdh.oeaw.ac.at/>, in a future feature release.

[^12]: The latest iteration of this application is to be found at
    <https://thun-korrespondenz.acdh.oeaw.ac.at/pages/index.html>.

[^13]: See
    <https://github.com/csae8092/posts/tree/master/digital-edition-web-app>.

[^14]: <http://exist-db.org/>

[^15]: <https://www.oeaw.ac.at/acdh/tools/arche/>, repository based on
    Fedora Commons.

[^16]: https://github.com/KONDE-AT/
